---
layout: post
title: What do Newton's laws really say?
date: 2024-11-13 23:40:16
description: newton
tags: physics
categories:
---

I recently read this Feynman quote:
> Study hard what interests you the most in the most undisciplined, irreverent and original manner possible.

And decided to express some long-suppressed irreverance on this blog: Newton's laws of motion are a piece of terrible writing. They do not really encapsulate the research that Newton had actually done. If I was a coauthor of the paper with him, I would write a comment in red in the overleaf. If this was a github pull request, I would refuse to merge it until the laws were rewritten. For reference, here are the laws from Wikipedia:
1. A body remains at rest, or in motion at a constant speed in a straight line, except insofar as it is acted upon by a force.
2. At any instant of time, the net force on a body is equal to the body's acceleration multiplied by its mass or, equivalently, the rate at which the body's momentum is changing with time.
3. If two bodies exert forces on each other, these forces have the same magnitude but opposite directions.

Let's first start with the obvious issue here. The first law sounds like a weaker form of the second law? The second law already says $$F = ma$$. If you assume $$F=0$$, then as long as the body exists (and thus has non-zero mass), the only possibility is that $$a = 0$$. And by the definition of acceleration, $$a = 0$$ implies that the velocity does not change. So law #1 is actually implied by law #2. This is like if there was a second rule of fight club that said all talking is prohibited. I can understand wanting to draw attention to a specific consequence of a law you formulated. For example, just saying $$F=ma$$ may not always immediately convey to the reader all of its consequences, and you may want to draw their attention to how the absence of force means velocity does not change. But in today's parlance, such a statement would be considered a corollary and I wouldn't mind if law #1 was actually stated as a corollary.

The second issue is more subtle but also bigger. 
